A brother feels guilty
because he did things before his baptism.
A parent feels guilty
because his children left the truth.
A sister feels guilty
because she divorced her unfaithful husband.
What do all these people have in common?
They suffer from inappropriate guilt.
Now, a comedian joked,
“Religion is basically guilt with different holidays.”
Why is it
that religious people carry so much guilt?
And can anything good come from it?
The Bible, of course, associates guilt
with laws, sin, and transgression.
Open your Bibles with me to Galatians 3:19,
and notice the effect
the Mosaic Law had on the Israelites.
Paul says: “Why, then, the Law?
It was added to make transgressions manifest.”
So the Law reminded God’s people every day
that they were sinners.
Jehovah’s Law was perfect.
No one could live up to it.
So for the Israelites,
feeling guilty was inescapable.
Now, why would Jehovah do that?
Why give them the Law
to make them feel guilty?
Well, there were at least three reasons.
First, we should feel guilty
when we’ve done something wrong.
It reminds us of Jehovah’s position
as Universal Sovereign
and of his righteous standards,
and it confirms that our conscience is working.
Second, we can all admit that there are times
when we may not have done
something wrong yet,
but we may be wanting to
and, at that point, guilt is our friend.
In some ways, it’s like physical pain.
Physical pain makes us aware
of a potential health problem,
and the emotional pain of guilt
alerts us to the fact
that there may be
potential moral or spiritual problems.
And finally, third,
when someone confesses his guilt,
it helps both the wrongdoer and the victim.
Confession brings the guilty person
relief through forgiveness,
and it makes the victim feel better
when he sees that the guilty one
loves them enough to apologize.
Unfortunately,
we can feel guilty even without being guilty.
And inappropriate guilt
often leads people
to emotional distress
and sometimes even harsh self-criticism.
So let’s consider three situations
where inappropriate guilt can paralyze us
and also what we can do to get rid of it.
The first situation is
what we might call “persistent guilt.”
This is guilt
for something you did and repented over
—even received forgiveness for—
but you can’t forgive yourself.
So you continue to ruminate over the matter,
and it saps your joy and strength.
What can you do?
Well, consider the apostle Paul.
There were times
when the things he did in the past upset him.
How did he handle those feelings?
To answer, let’s read together
1 Corinthians 15:9, 10.
As we know,
Paul (before he was baptized)
persecuted Christ’s brothers.
He even supported the stoning of Stephen.
How do you think
those memories made him feel?
Well, notice what he says in verse 9:
“For I am the least of the apostles,
“and I am not worthy of being called an apostle,
because I persecuted the congregation of God.”
Now, when you’re in a position
of responsibility like Paul was,
feelings of unworthiness like this
can be devastating.
Satan tries to make you doubt yourself
—whether you still have
God’s approval in your life.
And he often does this
when you’re most vulnerable
—when you’re already crushed under the weight
of your own failures and disappointments.
But Paul didn’t let these feelings defeat him.
He didn’t give in to the pressure.
Notice what he says next in verse 10:
“But by God’s undeserved kindness
I am what I am.
“And his undeserved kindness
to me was not in vain,
“but I labored more than all of them;
“yet it was not I,
but the undeserved kindness
of God that is with me.”
So Paul realized
that Jehovah accepted him for what he was,
and he knew that he couldn’t change
whatever happened in the past,
no matter how much he might want to.
He accepted God’s undeserved kindness,
and he let Jehovah use him.
Well, like Paul,
we’ve repented over our past sins.
We’ve confessed them to the extent necessary.
So we can be sure, too,
that Jehovah will be merciful with us.
Why?
Because Jehovah promises
that he forgives in a large way.
So we can take him at his word
and accept his forgiveness.
Now, we might refer to a second situation
that makes people suffer as “compassion guilt.”
This is feeling guilty
because you didn’t do enough to help someone.
And caregivers often struggle
with feelings like this.
Even when they’re doing all they can to help,
they sometimes feel guilty
about not being able to do more.
One sister who was caring
for her elderly parents said,
“Having to say ‘I can’t take care of you anymore’
is extremely difficult.”
What can help those in this situation?
Well, notice what Ecclesiastes 7:16 says
we should all avoid:
“Do not be overly righteous,
“nor show yourself excessively wise.
Why should you bring ruin to yourself?”
Another way we could put this is:
Avoid becoming a perfectionist.
Conscientiousness
can easily deteriorate into perfectionism.
If we’re trying to do more than we want to,
can do, or even should do,
then we’re only setting ourselves up
for disappointment and failure.
To illustrate, some people see caregiving
as a way to repay their parents
for all they did while they were growing up.
But if we see it that way,
we’re always going to feel guilty
because we can never fully repay our parents.
Acting out of guilt will only drain us over time
and make us less effective as a caregiver.
What can we do instead?
We can share the load.
Family, friends, neighbors,
and professionals can be of help.
But we have to ask for help,
and we have to ask directly for it.
Hints seldom work.
It may surprise us who and how many
are willing to pitch in
if we make our needs known.
Finally, a third situation
that’s paralyzing for some
is “imagined guilt.”
This is guilt over something
you think you did but didn’t.
For example,
Theresa’s daughter died in a car accident,
and she says, “I felt guilty
that I had sent her out that night on an errand.”
Another sister says,
“The guilt that you feel during a divorce,
“even if you’re not the guilty party,
can be overwhelming.”
What can someone do in this situation?
First, it’s important
not to bottle up those emotions.
Share your feelings
with a friend who’ll really listen to you.
Allow them to reassure you
that irrational feelings are common,
especially when you’re grieving.
But second,
no matter how much we love someone,
we can’t control his or her life.
Remember what Ecclesiastes 9:11 says,
and this is true for all of us:
“I have seen something further under the sun,
“that the swift do not always win the race,
“nor do the mighty win the battle,
“nor do the wise always have the food,
“nor do the intelligent always have the riches,
“nor do those with knowledge
always have success,
“because time and unexpected events
overtake them all.”
So we are not to blame
for things we cannot control.
Before you accuse yourself of wrongdoing,
make sure that wrongdoing actually took place.
Talk it over with a trusted friend,
and refocus your thoughts on the future.
Reflecting on all kinds of “if onlys”
won’t change anything,
and it may slow down your recovery.
Don’t let inappropriate guilt control your life.
So in review, a guilty conscience
can and should move us
to confess our sins and to take positive action,
but inappropriate guilt is dangerous.
It can crush our spirit
and keep us from giving our best to Jehovah.
Don’t let guilt paralyze you.
Concentrate all your energies
on what you can do right now
and on what lies ahead.